# Climate Claim Analysis
## Friends of Science Society, n.d. *Evidence Over Ideology*. [online] Climate Change 101. Available at: <[Evidence Over Ideology](http://climatechange101.ca/learn-more-about-climate-change/evidence-over-ideology)>.

This article, called *Evidence Over Ideology*, attempts to devalue popular ideas belonging to climate scientists. Additionally, it serves to diminish existing concerns regarding how climate change will affect humans and the planet as a whole. Five different ‘ideologies’ are challenged with ‘evidence’ to indicate their unreliability. Only the noteworthy claims will be presented here. 

First, Arrhenius’ foundational climatic hypothesis regarding doubling of CO2 in the atmosphere is called into question, as he revised it years later to say that warming will be insignificant. The author uses this, and the false assumption that the Earth can be considered a ‘greenhouse’, as evidence that warming-reducing interactions that take place in the atmosphere were originally overlooked. The author then compares expected IPCC temperatures to those observed in recent years, with satellite technology and weather balloons. They show that values today are actually 0.6°C lower than what the IPCC predicted. Finally, the work of Habibullov Abdussamatov, which is based on sunspot data, is referenced to demonstrate the possibility that the Earth is actually entering a cooling period that will continue for decades. 

Some of these claims could be dismissed quickly, within minimal research. For example, sunspot data, on its own, has been deemed an unreliable predictor of the future (Solanki and Krivova, 2003; Georgieva, Bianchi and Kirov, 2005). This invalidates the last claim made in this paper. Furthermore, Arrhenius’ change of outlook is from the early 1900s and is no longer relevant anymore considering the development of climate science since then. The argument involving discrepancies between IPCC predictions and actual temperatures, however, was puzzling and required additional investigation. 

The author of this article uses a line graph to compare the average of 102 IPCC CMIP-5 climate models to observed temperatures from 6 datasets. There are many reputable reports of limitations associated with the CMIP-5 climate models (Power et al., 2017; Kravtsov, 2017). However, this does not necessarily indicate that the work of the IPCC should not be trusted. The IPCC, itself, recognizes bias and actively works to correct this in updated models (Flato and Marotzke, 2018; Bindoff and Stott, 2018). This article only compares the average of various future scenarios and neglects to mention that many future scenarios were quite close to the observed temperatures (Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute, 2020). The whole point of having many proposed scenarios is the recognition that any of these paths may be followed in the future; the IPCC did not create these simulations for the purpose of finding their average, but to understand our options. Ultimately, the claim made in this report is a gross oversimplification. It should also be noted that this particular snapshot of the graph uses a scale that embellishes the difference between predicted and observed temperatures (this y-axis was scaled from -0.2 to 1.0, while others were at least -1 to -2.5) (Chaturvedi et al., 2014; Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute, 2020; Tebaldi et al., 2020).

The ClimateChange101 website is targeted towards the general public, especially individuals who are not sure what to think about climate change. Information is framed as though it is a review of climate change literature in plain language, as exemplified by the name of the authoring group, Friends of Science Society, but this entire article embodies doubt in the climate crisis. This lack of transparency, in itself, makes me question if this website is operating under biases and, thus, if information is even accurate. The aforementioned investigation confirms these suspicions and invalidates this article and the source from which it originates. 

